---
date: 2025-06-25
domains:
- adventofcode.com
local_url: http://localhost:1313/computer-science/programming-challenges/advent-of-code/2024/AoC2024/Day01/01/
title: 'AoC 2024 Day 01: Historian Hysteria'
---

{{< citation
  id="AoC2024Day01"
  title="Day 1 - Advent of Code 2024: Historian Hysteria"
  url="https://adventofcode.com/2024/day/1"
  accessed="2025-06-25" >}}

## Problem Statement

### Part One

Through out the Chief Historian's office, the historically significant locations
are listed not by the name, but by a unique number called the **location ID**.
To make sure they don't miss anything, The Historians split into two groups,
each searching the office and trying to create their own complete list of
location IDs.

There's just one problem: by holding the two lists up **side by side** (your
puzzle input), it quickly becomes clear that the lists aren't very similar.
Maybe you can help The Historians reconcile their lists?

For example:

```txt
3 4
4 3
2 5
1 3
3 9
3 3
```

Maybe the lists are only off by a small amount! To find out, pair up the numbers
and measure how far apart they are. Pair up the **smallest number in the left
list** with the **smallest number in the right list,** then the
**second-smallest left number** with the **second-smallest right number**, and
so on.

Within each pair, figure out **how far apart** the two numbers are; you'll need
to **add up all of those distances.** For example, if you pair up a 3 from the
left list with a 7 from the right list, the distance apart is 4; if you pair up
a 9 with a 3, the distance apart is 6.

To find the **total distance** between the left list and the right list, add up
the distances between all of the pairs you found.

Your actual left and right lists contain many location IDs. **What is the total
distance between your lists?**

## My Solution

{{< readfile
  file="/content/computer-science/programming-challenges/advent-of-code/2024/AoC2024/Day01/Day01.cs"
  highlight="cs"
  id="Day01.cs">}}
